---
template: blog-post
title: Open source experiments as a junior developer
slug: /open-source
date: 2017-01-28 19:00
description: open source post
featuredImage: /assets/open-source.jpg
---
I have built a few toy applications with Ruby/Rails, deployed some of them to Heroku/VPS, and am hopeful that one day those apps will be exposed to real users, instead of hiding and only being touched by the test suite occasionally. However, I am ashamed to admit that I tend to ignore one fact: most of my work if not all of it was enabled by other open source apps, tools and libraries.

The typical scenario in my projects: I start out creating objects in my test suite and as it gets bigger it also gets slower. No worries, that is what ‘factory girl’ or ‘fabricator’ are for. I add one of them to my Gemfile, configure it and start fabricating data to speed up my tests. I might complain about how hard it is to setup factories for complicated models with nested relationships, but I never really think about what happens under the hood. I move on. Soon I get tired of even typing strings for factories, especially if there is uniqueness on model attributes. No worries, I get the ‘faker’ gem and dynamically add the index to the end of the string. It will create unique and fake names, urls, addresses etc. This can go on forever, but you know what I am getting at…

The way I look at open source and its importance started to change when I was required to actually contribute to an open source project while in Turing School of Software and Design. I have to admit that Jeff Casimir, the executive director and instructor, kind of sugarcoated what we were about to experience on the front of open source software, by making it sound like a really cool and relatively easy thing to do. As a believer in open source software I still think it is a great concept. But maybe not as easy as it seems, at least for developers who are starting out.

So anyway, I created a list of open source projects I felt like contributing to — some of them more realistic than the others. I decided to start with the easiest one — OSS Board, a platform that connects developers and open-source maintainers. Namely, I had to rebuild a view that displays a developer user’s repositories, which was being limited to 100 repos due to Github API pagination. My task was to display all repositories regardless of the number. It does not get easier than that, does it? I was planning to spend between 1–2 hours and started working one evening. Since I am a trained Rails dev, it is my comfort zone and after glancing at it I was sure it was a Rails project. When I cloned it down though, I noticed the folder structure was a little different. I ran ‘rake db:test:prepare’ in order to run ‘rspec’ — no luck! I got a weird error message which contained the word ‘Hanami’, googled it and found out it was a Japanese flower. Then searched based on the full error message and realized it could also mean a light-weight and performant Ruby framework. Their docs be found here, which I had to dig to just set up the local environment.

At this point I had already spent about two hours, but was able to run the tests! 422 tests for a small application, which was great, I thought. There were a lot of JavaScript tests as well. It took me less time to actually build/change the functionality than setting things up. Then I ran the tests, and guess what 16 existing tests that were not testing that view directly, were failing. Apparently, I had introduced some things that broke the other tests. This was a painful phase — trying to understand what was failing and why. I still could not fix some of those tests, and had to contact the owner of the repo. I was told to revert the VCR cassettes as those remaining tests that were failing were dependent on them. I had updated the cassettes because the interaction of the app with the Github API was changed, and I had to make sure the tests for that view expect the new behavior. Since I kind of put some of those other tests under microscope, I got to know the format and style of the test suite and used that knowledge while writing my own tests.

Finally, I opened a pull request with my code and another one to update the ‘contributing’ section of their documentation. I just did not want the other contributors not familiar with Hanami to spend extra time on setting things up locally. I also did not want them to delete the cassettes!

This, in a nutshell, is my first (and definitely not the last) experience with trying to contribute to open source. I am glad that I am reminded to give back to the open source community, or at least to try. I also want to thank all open source contributors, especially the ones who contributed to tools I have used. I might not know you personally, but the spirit of your code (if not also the code itself) lives in my projects…